The only son of Anasterian Sunstrider, king of Quel'Thalas,
Prince Kael'thas was also a powerful mage and member of the Six,
the shadowy high council of the Kirin Tor.

Sometime before the Second War, Kael'thas took an issue with the human Nathanos Marris being admitted to the Farstriders,
and sent a letter to Quel'Thalas demanding Sylvanas to dismiss Nathanos from the ranger corps. Despite this opposition,
however, Sylvanas persisted, and her response was simply that Nathanos would be a loyal ally.

Shortly before the Second War,
he and the other members of the high council questioned Khadgar about the orcs and the events in Karazhan that led to the death of Medivh.
Two years later, Kael'thas alongside Krasus and Antonidas battled against death knights who came to steal the Eye of Dalaran.
However, the death knights escaped with the help of the black dragonflight.

Despite his status as both Quel'Thalas' royal prince and his place on the Council of Six,
Kael'thas proved himself an approachable individual and quickly took to Lady Jaina Proudmoore.
His charm and "perfectly" handsome features impressed the young sorceress,
though his regality and her longing for Prince Arthas Menethil of Lordaeron had her rebuke his advances - such as traveling to visit the beautiful elven homeland,
Quel'Thalas, where magic was even more commonplace than Dalaran. Arthas,
in turn, came to view the older and more powerful Kael with jealousy,
knowing that if push came to shove, Kael would end up victorious.
Later, Arthas himself was to visit Dalaran to study, and Jaina began a relationship with him.
Kael'thas did not take kindly to this,
and upon discovering it simply feigned mild surprise that Arthas would be so secretive about having a woman such as Jaina.

Kael'thas was opposed to the notion of upkeeping the internment camps,
viewing the orcs' inability to control their dependency on demon blood as a testament to their lack of formidability as a people.
This brought him into conflict with Antonidas, Jaina, and Arthas,
who had come to believe that sentient individuals - lethargic or not - should be shown mercy and that the orcs were not beyond salvation.